<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h2>
			<p>My mother and Emma came out to the corridor to welcome me. My father had mounted his horse and gone to oversee the farm-work.</p>
			<p>Very soon they called me to the dining-room, and I promptly went there because I thought I should meet María; but I was disappointed. When I asked my mother for her, she said, “As those people are coming tomorrow, the girls are very anxious to have some fine dishes ready; but I think that they must have finished by this time, and that they will soon be here.”</p>
			<p>Just as I was rising from the table, José, who was going up the mountain, driving, two mules loaded with cane, paused at a point from which he could see into the house, and called to me:</p>
			<p>“Good afternoon! I can’t stop, because I have a big load and night is coming on. I’ve left a little present for you with the children. Get up early tomorrow, for it will be a sure thing.”</p>
			<p>“Very well,” I replied, “I will start very early. My regards to all.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t forget the buckshot.”</p>
			<p>He waved his hat to me, and passed on.</p>
			<p>I went to my room to get my rifle ready; not that it really needed cleaning, but I wanted a pretext for leaving the dining-room, since María was not to be found there. I had opened and held in my hand a little box of cartridges, when I saw María coming, bringing me my coffee, which she was stirring with a spoon. My cartridges fell all over the floor as soon as she drew near. Without looking at me, she said, “Good afternoon,” and put down the cup with a rather unsteady hand; then for an instant she let her timid eyes rest upon mine; she smiled, and dropping to her knees, began to pick up the cartridges.</p>
			<p>“Don’t you do that,” said I, “I will do it afterwards.”</p>
			<p>“I have good sharp eyes,” she replied, “to find little things like these. Where is the box?”</p>
			<p>She reached out her hand to take it, and exclaimed, as she saw it, “What! every one dropped!”</p>
			<p>“It wasn’t full,” I said, beginning to help her.</p>
			<p>“And what do you want of these tomorrow?” she asked, blowing the dust off some of the cartridges which she held in one of her pink hands.</p>
			<p>“What do you know about tomorrow and about these things?”</p>
			<p>“Well, I know that this hunting is dangerous, and I imagine that it is a dreadful thing to miss a shot, and, besides, I know by the box that these are the cartridges which the doctor gave you, and said that they were English, and very good ones.”</p>
			<p>“You hear everything”</p>
			<p>“Sometimes I would have given a good deal not to hear. Perhaps you had better give up this hunt⁠—José left a present with us for you.”</p>
			<p>“Do you wish me not to go?”</p>
			<p>“How could I ask that?”</p>
			<p>“Why not?”</p>
			<p>She looked at me, but did not reply.</p>
			<p>“I think that must be all,” said she, rising to her feet, and looking around the floor. “I must go now. Your coffee will be cold.”</p>
			<p>“You taste it.”</p>
			<p>“But don’t stop to load your rifle now. It’s good,” she added, handing me the cup.</p>
			<p>“Well, I’ll leave the rifle now, and take the coffee; but don’t go away.” I had gone into my room and come out again.</p>
			<p>“Is there much for you to do in there?”</p>
			<p>“Oh yes,” I answered, “getting ready for tomorrow. But must you go?”</p>
			<p>She shrugged her shoulders, and leaned her head on one side, as if to say, “As you wish.”</p>
			<p>“I owe you an explanation,” said I, going nearer to her. “Will you hear me?”</p>
			<p>“Didn’t I tell you that there are things which I do not want to hear?” she replied, rattling the box of cartridges.</p>
			<p>“ But I thought that I⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“It’s surely that you are going to speak of⁠ ⁠… what you thought.”</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>“That I ought to listen to you; but I ought not this time.”</p>
			<p>“How bad an opinion you must have had of me lately!”</p>
			<p>She did not reply, and busied herself reading the lettering on the box.</p>
			<p>“I’ll say nothing, then. But tell me, what did you think?”</p>
			<p>“Why should I tell you now?”</p>
			<p>“Won’t you allow me to apologize to you?”</p>
			<p>“What I should like to know is why you did that; yet I dread to know it, because I can’t imagine what motive you had, and I have always thought that you must have had one which I ought not to know. But, as it seems that you are happy again, why, I am happy too.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t deserve that you should be so good to me.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps I am the one who do not deserve⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“I treated you unfairly, and if you will allow it, I will go down on my knees to ask your pardon.”</p>
			<p>Her eyes, which had been veiled for a few moments, now shone with all their beauty, and she exclaimed: “Good heavens! no. I have forgotten it all; do you hear? All.”</p>
			<p>“But on one condition,” she added, after a short pause.</p>
			<p>“Whatever you wish.”</p>
			<p>“If ever I say or do anything that displeases you, you are to tell me of it; and I will not say or do it again. That’s very easy, isn’t it.”</p>
			<p>“And I, can’t I ask the same thing of you?”</p>
			<p>“No, because I am not able to give you advice, nor always to know if what I think is best; besides, you know what I am going to say to you before I say it.”</p>
			<p>“Is that true? Then you must be sure that I love you with all my heart,” said I, in a low voice, and strongly moved.</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes,” she replied, softly, and almost touching my lips with her hand to tell me I must be silent took a few steps towards the parlor.</p>
			<p>“What are you going to do?” I asked.</p>
			<p>“Don’t you hear Juan calling me, and crying because he can’t find me?”</p>
			<p>“Hesitating for a moment, there was in her smile Such sweetness and amorous languor that after she was gone I could still see her face.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
