<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h2>
			<p>The arrival of the mails, and the visit of the M⁠⸺s, had accumulated a great deal to do in my father’s study. We worked steadily all the next day, but when we were with the family in the dining-room, María’s smiles made me sweet promises for the hour of rest; in their strength I could go cheerfully to the most wearisome labor.</p>
			<p>At eight in the evening I went with my father to his bedroom, and responding to my usual goodnight, he added, “We have accomplished something, but there is still much to be done; so, then, early tomorrow morning.”</p>
			<p>On such days as this María was always waiting for me in the evening, talking with Emma and my mother in the parlor, reading to the latter a chapter of the “Imitation” or teaching the children prayers.</p>
			<p>“Did you see your friend this morning?” she asked.</p>
			<p>“Yes; why do you ask that now?”</p>
			<p>“Because I have not been able to ask it before.”</p>
			<p>“And why are you interested in knowing?”</p>
			<p>“Did he ask you to return his visit?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“And you are going to, aren’t you?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly.”</p>
			<p>“He is very fond of you, isn’t he?”</p>
			<p>“I have always believed so.”</p>
			<p>“And you still believe it?”</p>
			<p>“Why not?”</p>
			<p>“Are you as fond of him as when you were together in college?”</p>
			<p>“Yes; but what makes you talk about this today?”</p>
			<p>“It is because I want you always to be his friend, and hope he will keep on being yours. But you didn’t tell him anything?”</p>
			<p>“Anything of what?”</p>
			<p>“Why, of that.”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean by ‘that’?”</p>
			<p>“You know what I mean. You didn’t tell him, did you?”</p>
			<p>“This is the first time I ever failed to understand you.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, goodness! of course you understand. It is if you told him about what⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>As I sat looking at her, while she smiled at me in an almost childish eagerness, she continued, “Very well; you need not tell me now.”</p>
			<p>She began to build little towers with backgammon-counters, with which we were playing.</p>
			<p>“If you don’t look at me,” I said, “I will not confess to you what I told Carlos.”</p>
			<p>“Well, then, let’s see; now tell,” she replied, trying to do what I asked.</p>
			<p>“I told him everything.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, not everything?”</p>
			<p>“Did I do wrong?”</p>
			<p>“As if you could. But, then, why didn’t you tell him before he came?”</p>
			<p>“My father did not want me to.”</p>
			<p>“I know; but then he would not have come, and wouldn’t that have been better?”</p>
			<p>“Undoubtedly, but I could not do it; and now he is satisfied that I did not.”</p>
			<p>“He will keep on, then, being your friend?”</p>
			<p>“There is no reason why he should not.”</p>
			<p>“True, and I do not want him just for this⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Carlos will thank you as much as I do for that.”</p>
			<p>“So you parted as usual? And he went away happy?”</p>
			<p>“As happy as he could be under the circumstances.”</p>
			<p>“Then I was not to blame, was I?”</p>
			<p>“No, María, and he will not think the less of you for what you have done.”</p>
			<p>“If he truly cares for you it ought to be so.”</p>
			<p>“But mamma is going,” she added, “and Emma is falling asleep. It’s time now, isn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“Must you go?”</p>
			<p>“And what am I going to do? Will you have to write so much tomorrow?”</p>
			<p>“Very likely.”</p>
			<p>“And when Transito comes?”</p>
			<p>“When is she coming?”</p>
			<p>“At twelve; so she sent word.”</p>
			<p>“By that time we shall have finished. Goodbye till tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>She took leave of me with the same words, but was surprised that I kept the handkerchief which was in the hand she gave me to press. María did not understand that this scented handkerchief was my treasure for a whole night.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
